[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings".
Could our universe be
just one in a vast sea
of the multiverse?
If so, how does it have
any bearing on our lives?
In this episode, we begin
to grasp our infinity
and discover ways
to actualize more
of our full human potential.
Scientists and
science-fiction writers
alike love to toy with
the ideas of multiverses
and parallel realities.
But usually when they
do, they invoke it
as a way to explain away the
anthropic principle, namely
that our universe is fine tuned
for life, as if by design,
or alternatively to eliminate
the quantum interpretation
of a participatory
universe, meaning
that we have a role to play
in creating this universe.
Often when we hear
scientists or media reporting
on mysterious topics,
especially ones
that are gaining
a lot of attention
or that seem to be
paranormal, they
like to use this
phrase mystery solved.
Is it really, or
is that just a way
to get people to think
that there is no mystery?
Science has solved it,
so we can stop wondering,
stop asking questions, stop
believing in higher powers
or aliens or whatever
mystery and just
go back to life as usual.
Perhaps we might want to all
be wary of this phrase "mystery
solved".
Life is one big mystery.
Our universe is an
even bigger one.
And the biggest
mystery of all is us.
Who are we?
What is our potential?
Exploring the mysteries
is what brings
meaning and curiosity
and a desire
to seek more knowledge so
that we can grow from it.
Rather than trying to
explain away the mystery,
let's embrace it.
Let's welcome a bit more magic
and mystery into our lives.
When we do, life becomes a lot
more exciting and interesting.
That is why this series is
called "Mystery Teachings",
and that is also
why mystery schools
are called mystery schools.
Rather than trying to
explain away the mystery
or hide the mystery,
as some suspect,
it's about exploring
the mysteries of life,
the universe, the soul,
the nature of spirit,
and of the self.
Despite the way that
scientists interpret
this idea of a
multiverse, it too
is a mystery worth exploring.
Why?
Well, because it helps us
to touch infinity and expand
our mind, to remember who
we are as eternal beings.
Metaphysics also
works with the ideas
of multiverses and parallel
realities while still
including consciousness and
spirit as vital ingredients.
Let's explore what both
science and metaphysics have
to say on these
ideas and how they
can be used in a way
that actually empowers
our lives in the here and now.
We've learned that
string theory provides
some exciting and beautiful
possibilities for discovering
a unified theory of
everything, and string theory
is what has opened the door to
the multiverse idea in science.
How did it do that?
Well, it goes back to the
issue that string theorists are
grappling with, the challenge of
identifying the exact geometry
of the superstrings
and extra dimensions
hidden within our universe.
They have many
candidate shapes allowed
by the math, over
10 to the power
500 possibilities, which
is a massive number,
each geometry
theoretically corresponding
to its own universe with a
different set of physical laws
and tuning.
But rather than saying there
can be only one right answer
resulting in only
one universe, namely
ours, string
theorists have instead
proposed that all of
these possibilities
are equally probable and
likely exist somewhere
within a multiverse, meaning
there are at least 10
to the power of 500
differently tuned
universes out there in
the multiverse, maybe even
infinite numbers.
But this part where they say
they're all equally probable
and all exist, this is the
part where some scientists then
claim that this
means that there is
nothing special about the
fine tuning of our universe.
We simply find these sets of
parameters in our universe
because we can only
exist in a universe that
is fine tuned for life.
But there are many other types
of universes in the multiverse.
We are just one possibility
in an infinite sea, nothing
special.
Therefore, mystery
solved, or not.
Really, all of this
is speculation based
on assumptions, not evidence.
How about we explore
another perspective?
What does metaphysics
say about this?
Well, to answer that,
let's first take a look
at hermetic teachings.
In the hermetic teachings on
the principle of mentalism
which says, "The all is mind.
The universe is
mental," it later
goes on to say that "The
all creates universes
in its own mentality,
and there are
millions of millions of
such universes in existence
within the infinite
mind of the all."
There it is.
Hermeticists have been talking
about the idea of a multiverse
long before modern scientists.
But they can see
that this multiverse
is within the infinite
mind of the all.
They then go on to say
that you are dwelling
in the infinite mind of the
all, and your possibilities
and opportunities are infinite
both in time and space.
In other words, we are
evolving within the all,
and there are infinite
possibilities and ways
in which we can evolve in
our journey through eternity.
Rather than rob us of the
spirit or a divine source,
the hermetic approach
to the multiverse
empowers us to realize
our infinite possibilities
and eternal being.
Is that it, or is
there more to be
gained from the
metaphysical perspective?
The mystery school
Kabbalah, we explore
the concept of the
multiverse as well,
and we use it to expand
our consciousness,
to touch infinity.
For example, we explore
the Kabbalistic concept
of Ein Sof, the infinite
source that is without end.
Ein Sof is that
source of will that
initiates the big bang of
creation of our universe.
How does Ein Sof do this?
Well, first of all, Ein
Sof, being truly infinite,
is beyond our
universe, which means
that Ein Sof's home is the
multiverse or the infinite sea
of universes.
One version of the story
says that the infinite mind
of Ein Sof devised a plan
to manifest a universe that
was conducive to
life, consciousness,
and its progression,
one in which
eternal spirits can
come into and inhabit,
to express and thrive
in as living beings.
And to create this
universe, Ein Sof
summoned 144,000 rays
from the multiverse.
Each of these rays carry
different ingredients
or aspects that could
fulfill parts of the plant.
Ein Sof as a source
that creates universes
had already created
other universes
within the multiverse,
but each universe
has different components,
different laws, and tuning.
And to create this new
universe, Ein Sof needed
a specific set of
ingredients or, we could say,
information, or
even better would
be to say a specific
set of blueprints
that were needed to succeed
at fulfilling this plan.
Each ray holds a blueprint.
To get the right
blueprints that would work,
Ein Sof first sent out 144,000
feelers or messengers out
into the multiverse,
and their mission
was to scan, communicate,
and gain insight
from amongst the trillions of
universes and possibilities
to figure out what works.
As these messengers
went out all over,
they then each
returned with one ray
or blueprint that would work.
As 144,000 rays with
the correct blueprints
then came back together,
they collided into one point.
That collision resulted in
what we now call the big bang.
That place where these
144,000 rays united
is what we call the
great central sun which
is like one central mainframe
that holds all the blueprints.
From there, the 144,000
are then sent out
into the logos of the newly
created and expanding universe.
Each ray holds the blueprint
for a different density level.
There is a master
observing or overseeing
each ray with a host
of angelic beings
to support them in now
carrying out the blueprints
and manifesting the plan.
It's a cool story, but
what does it reveal to us?
Kabbalah is saying that
there are 144,000 density
levels on the
vibrational spectrum
between the great
central sun or origin
and us here in the physical.
144,000 is regarded as a very
magical and sacred number
in Kabbalah.
There are all kinds of
neurological reasons for why,
but for now, let's
stay with this story
and what else it reveals.
According to Kabbalah, this
physical density is the densest
level, the 144,000th ray.
That obviously
then also tells us
that within each
density level or ray
there are sublevels as well.
We know from science
that in the physical,
we have a full spectrum
of vibrational energies
that we can interact with
such as light, sound, materia.
All of this that we can
detect in the physical is part
of the sublevels of the
144,000th ray or density level.
Remember that string
theory says there's
just one string with a
particular geometry whose
vibrations manifest all the
different particles, forces,
energies that make up the
physical universe we know.
Kabbalah is saying
the same thing,
but it calls that string
a ray, and in particular,
it is the 144,000th ray.
What does this also imply then?
Well, it says that our
universe is not just physical.
Within our universe, there
are 144,000 density levels
with this physical level being
just one of them, the last one.
Not only are there many places
within our physical universe
to explore and learn
from besides earth,
there are also many levels
beyond this physical density
to learn and grow from, and that
is just within this universe.
Beyond this universe, there
is an infinite multiverse
to also explore.
So now why are we so
stuck on this idea
that we can only learn and
grow in this physical density
of earth?
As the hermeticists say, our
possibilities and opportunities
are infinite.
The only thing that
limits us is our mind.
Our mind, our concepts, our
thoughts create our reality,
meaning the box we
put ourselves in.
By stretching our
mind and our concepts
out to touch
infinity and consider
all these other possibilities
and opportunities,
we can free ourselves from
limited thinking and limited
ways of being.
We can realize that this
life in this universe
offers us a smorgasbord
of opportunity,
and that is the purpose
of this universe.
That was Ein Sof's plan.
That is why our universe
is so finely tuned for life
and consciousness to
evolve and progress
in it, even in ways beyond
what this physical realm can
offer us.
With this expanded awareness
of the possibilities that
lie before us, we
can hopefully let
go of getting so
caught up in the drama
and minutia of the human game.
We can hopefully remember our
eternal being because we too
came from the multiverse.
We are some of the spirits that
Ein Sof planned this universe
for so that we could inhabit
it and express ourselves at all
the density levels, not
just the 144,000th level.
This level is the densest.
As the light from source
flows down from the highest
vibrational level to the
great central sun to us
here in this physical
density matrix,
its vibration gets slowed down.
And what does that mean?
It means that this
vibrational level of matter
is the bottom speed of
light and is therefore
the furthest away from the
source that we can get.
That is why it is so
hard being physical,
and that is why this reality is
not the true reality because it
is so filtered and distorted
by the low vibrations
of this physicality.
But at the same
time, we are here
to experience this
density, to learn
to manifest at this
density and find joy
in living here as well.
Realize too that our spirit has
already traveled and explored
through all the
higher density levels
while en route
from the multiverse
to the great central sun
out through the logos
across the cosmos, and
after eons of time,
we are now here exploring
this physical life on earth.
Our spirit has been on a cosmic
journey through eternity,
and this physical life is
just our final pit stop
before we begin
the journey home.
This physical life
is but the blink
of an eye compared to our
spirit's eternal life.
How's that for beginning
to grasp our infinity?
Some people may get
a bit overwhelmed
with this idea of
how much more there
is beyond this physical
life to learn and grow
through, but usually when that
happens it's because we're
projecting our pain, our fears,
and attachments from this life
onto those other realms.
But have no fear, it's
only up from here.
Once we transition out
of this physical density,
we then begin the journey
back towards higher vibrations
of light, and things get
better, less veiled or filtered,
more true to who we really are.
Now why do we come into
this density at all
if we have so many other
levels to learn and grow from?
Well, in short, we're
here in training.
We are here exploring
all these levels
in order to evolve and
transform into something more
than just pure formless spirit.
We are here to
actualize our potential.
Mystery-school teachings
say that we are here
to learn to become
creators so that we
can contribute to this
grand symphony of creation.
And here at this physical
density of the 144,000th ray is
where we learn to manifest.
This density level
of the physical
is where the pure
spirit potential can
have its ultimate expression.
To do so, we need to
learn how to harness
the subrays of this density.
How do we do that and
where do we begin?
We begin with ourselves
because we are the key.
All these rays and subrays
funnel down into us.
They form our blueprints
encoded within our DNA.
They form every atom
and subatomic particle
of our bodies because we are
the microcosm of the macrocosm.
Not only do we have all
the physical ingredients
within our body, we also have
all the various energy levels
that connect us to the higher
rays such as our chakras,
our aura, our etheric field,
our soul, our astral dimensions,
and more.
All the powers of
the universe are
within us just waiting for
us to learn to tap into them.
So we start with
ourselves and just
being aware of the
graded potential that
is available within us.
This is why above the doors
to the ancient mystery schools
were written the words
[NON-ENGLISH] or thine own self
thou must know.
In other words, know thyself.
Then as we enter
through those doors,
we gain greater access
to the deeper mysteries
and learning tools and methods
for harnessing the keys
within us.
What tools and methods?
Well, there are many because
we are multidimensional,
and different methods help
us access different levels
and dimensions of our being.
Meditation is, of course,
an important tool,
as is the right use of toning
or chanting words of power.
Ancient mystery-school
traditions
also hand down
rituals we can use
to harness the rays of
creation and various
energy-body-activation
methods that empower
and awaken us to more of
our greater potential.
Building our chi or life-force
energy is also important.
Prayer is good for maintaining
an open and clear connection
to spirit, and initiation
in an authentic lineage
is a spiritual technology for
catalyzing and accelerating
our progression.
Yet the place where we
must do the most work
is on our mind
and soul, not only
by quieting the mind
through meditation
but actually reprogramming it
to eliminate the subconscious
backlog and all the limiting
beliefs and ego attachments
from various indoctrination
or early traumas.
Now in saying this,
we're not just
talking about reprogramming
through psychology or hypnosis
or talk therapy or
other such techniques.
Those can be useful tools
in the right context
and with the right
practitioner, but what
we are talking about
here is alchemically
transmuting the blockages and
raising vibration from ego
to spirit.
It is a process of
spiritual alchemy,
and alchemy is both
an art and a science,
meaning there is a formula
to it, a step-by-step process
and precise art that we learn to
harness so that we can speed up
our progress.
And the best system
I know of for doing
that at an accelerated
rate is a combination
of ascending the tree of life
through universal Kabbalah
and being on a
path of initiation
in an authentic
mystery-school lineage.
How so?
Well, Kabbalah gives us this
map called the tree of life
as well as a vast system of
awakening and understanding
ourselves to repattern our
mind and soul using that map.
And the reason it is so powerful
is that the tree of life
is the very structure
of our DNA blueprints,
of how our mind works as well
as of the rays themselves.
When we work with
this geometry, we
are in essence using the
multidimensional communication
system that directly
connects into our DNA
and to the rays of creation.
To get a sense of
this, let's dig
in a bit deeper into the
mystery teachings of Kabbalah
and take a look at how
the rays of Ein Sof
are structured, remembering
also that these rays are
similar to the concept
of superstrings.
Could Kabbalah provide
further insight
into string theory and
the geometry of strings?
Let's find out.
Now the source of
these insights comes
from an expert on metaphysics,
Kabbalah, and quantum reality,
Frater Gudni Gudnason who is a
master initiate and key holder
in the lineage of King Solomon.
I really have to credit
him here because the most
mind-blowing teachings I've
ever learned on my path
have come through him.
Where do we start
in understanding
the structure of the rays?
At the top, of course.
If we were to unfold a ray
and look down the primary axis
from above, we would
see that each ray has
five parts arranged kind of like
a medicine wheel or equal arm
cross with four quarters
surrounding the center, which
is the fifth part.
What's fascinating
is that so many
ancient spiritual
traditions around the world
have some kind of symbol that
uses the same arrangement.
So all 144,000 rays
have these five parts,
which brings the total
to 720,000 subrays.
What Kabbalah reveals to
us is that this arrangement
is the axial view of the
three-dimensional tree of life.
The tree of life is thought
to be the master blueprint
or DNA of everything from
the cosmos to our mind
to our physical bodies
and biological DNA.
When we look at the tree
of life from the side view,
we see that not only
is each ray made
of five parts or subrays, which
here become the five pillars.
We also see that each
of those five parts
has several levels to them.
On the two-dimensional
view of the tree,
there are 10 plus 1 spheres if
we count the hidden one called
the [HEBREW].
But on a three-dimensional
view, there are a total of 16
plus 1 spheres,
including the [HEBREW]..
Then in addition to the
spheres are the paths
that connect the spheres.
So we can begin
to see that there
is an intricate structure here.
What if we considered
each sphere
to be akin to the process
of space being braided up
into a quantum loop, as is
proposed in loop quantum
gravity while each path is
a string as seen in string
theory, and around each of
those are wrapped the membranes
from M-theory, akin
to how the myelin
sheath wraps around our nerves?
Then, similar to the way our DNA
twists into a helix structure
and then is from there
curled and folded up
to form the
chromosomes, could we
imagine this
foundational structure
of the three-dimensional
tree of life
as the inner structure
of the rays from Ein Sof
then curling and
folding in upon itself
to form what scientists are
now calling superstrings
in hyperspace?
And through all
of this structure
flows information from source.
And as that information passes
through each part of each ray,
it is set to vibrate and move
at different frequencies,
all governed by this geometric
structure and all together
creating a complex
symphony of creation.
This is then happening fractally
within every atom of our body,
within every cell
as our DNA, within
our central nervous system as
the structures of our nerves
and spine, within
our body as a whole
and how our energy fields flow
and so on from the microcosm
to the macrocosm.
And even though this
physical density
is created by just
the final ray,
all the higher rays flow
down into this final density.
This is why this physical
matrix is the best
place to learn to harness all
the rays because they are all
here.
This is also why in Kabbalah
we say the kingdom of spirit
can be embodied in the flesh.
So all these 720,000
subrays that flow into us
are the integration points
that we have to work with here.
How do we work with them?
Well, to begin working
with them is simple.
It starts with just
being aware of them.
Just be aware that
there are 720,000 access
points to infinity right here.
Next, we must move beyond
just awareness into action.
What kind of action?
Well, any action is
good so long as we
are learning and
progressing from it,
but there are certain kinds
of actions that will also
help us access that
full potential faster,
especially actions that bring
us into greater coherence, which
we've mentioned before.
Now let's approach the same idea
from a new and more expanded
perspective.
This approach relates to
our multidimensionality
and coming into awareness
of parallel realities.
What's meant by
parallel realities?
How are they different
from alternate universes
within the multiverse
mentioned earlier?
Well, to answer that, let's
return to some science
and then compare it
again with metaphysics.
In quantum physics,
while scientists
all agree on the experimental
results and findings, what they
don't agree on is
the interpretation
or more philosophical
implications of quantum theory.
For the last hundred years, the
most widely accepted approach
to quantum mechanics was called
the Copenhagen interpretation
of Niels Bohr, Werner
Heisenberg, and colleagues.
It says that of the many
possible realities that
could exist, only one actually
exists in the physical,
and that one is the one
we choose to observe.
In other words, it says that
observation creates reality
by collapsing the waveform.
This implies that the universe
is participatory and requires
a conscious observer
at some point.
But in more recent
years, many physicists
have started gravitating towards
alternate interpretations known
as decoherence and many worlds.
One of the primary reasons for
this shift in interpretation
is that materialists don't like
the philosophical implications
of the observer effect or
a participatory universe.
Why?
Because it opens the
door to consciousness
and a spiritual source.
What approach then do the
many-worlds decoherence
interpretations take?
How are they different?
Now decoherence says
that interactions
from even the slightest
disturbance in the outer world
environment can disrupt
the wave function
and cause it to
decohere or split
into two distinctive waves.
So rather than an observer
collapsing the wave function
and forcing it to take
on one possibility,
this says the environment,
such as interaction
with a molecule of
air or a cosmic ray,
is all that's needed to
collapse the wave function.
This interpretation
alone, however,
does not account for all the
quantum phenomena we see.
Now the many-worlds
interpretation
then takes it further
and says that both or all
possible realities
physically exist,
but at each quantum
juncture a single reality
splits into multiple
parallel realities,
meaning there is no
wave function collapse.
Instead, this gives rise
to a never-ending sequence
of the physical universe
splitting itself
into parallel realities
and therefore creating
infinite parallel universes.
Now physicists claim that these
parallel realities are not
imaginary.
They are real,
concrete, and objective,
and our parallel self in one
of these alternate parallel
realities would equally argue
that theirs is the real thing.
What this is implying is that
either there is no choice,
or rather all choices
are made, each
in a different parallel
reality, and thus
the concept of free
will is an illusion.
Even stranger is
that it says that all
these parallel realities
coexist with us
in the same space and time.
They're just existing on
slightly different frequency
levels of energy, which is
just a thin membrane separating
them.
But scientists say that because
these parallel realities have
decohered, we can no
longer interact with them.
We don't see them
for a similar reason
to why we don't hear all
radio stations being broadcast
at once because we're only tuned
in to one frequency station.
Has science fiction
become science fact?
Maybe, although the verdict is
still out on this one because,
again, it is all conjecture.
And as one of the grand daddies
of quantum physics, John
Wheeler, has said about the
many-worlds and decoherence
interpretations, it requires
too much excess baggage.
Even if it is true,
it still isn't
sufficient to explain away
consciousness and spirit.
Metaphysics also works with
the idea of parallel realities
while still including
consciousness
and our participation
into the bigger picture.
And within such a framework,
there is a purpose to fulfill.
That purpose is to
first become aware
and then to restore
coherence by our use of will
and consciousness and
taking the right actions.
How does this work from the
metaphysical perspective then?
Well, the science of
universal Kabbalah
limits the number of
parallel realities
we might be in based on the
pattern of the tree of life.
Rather than a potentially
infinite number,
as in the many-worlds
interpretation,
Kabbalah organizes them into 22
pathways on the tree of life.
These 22 pathways define
the archetypes of life
or the ways of living life.
Have you ever wished there could
be two or more versions of you
to accomplish all you
want to do in life
or that you could have
become somebody different?
Well, Kabbalah says we have
22 distinct parallel realities
or versions of ourself
in this physical world.
They are 22 different
aspects of our total self,
each one being very
different and living out
its own physical life.
In each one of them, the
brain and the nervous system
are programmed
differently, giving us
22 unique perspectives
and experiences of life
and how things are.
All together, they
cover everything
we need to learn in
this physical life.
Now science often uses the
terms of parallel universe
and parallel reality as
referring to the same thing.
It all exists as different
universes in the multiverse.
But in Kabbalah, these
terms are used differently.
Realities are the ones we
are consciously connected
to and aware of.
So the question in
Kabbalah becomes
how many of the
22 parallel worlds
are we actually living
on a conscious level?
Becoming conscious of all
22 aspects of the self
is what we strive towards.
But how is that possible?
To get a better
sense of this, we
can use an analogy
of a cineplex.
Think of each life as being 1 of
22 different movies or perhaps
holograms playing
in a grand cineplex.
From the perspective
of each life
playing out in one
of the theaters,
there is only one script and
set of actors encountered.
And while our consciousness is
focused in on that one theater,
then all we are aware of is
that one movie or reality.
But from the perspective
of our spirit or true self,
it is in the center of the
cineplex or central viewing
room that can see all 22
movies simultaneously.
Our goal is to get our conscious
awareness to the center
where our spirit resides
rather than having it dispersed
through the 22 theaters.
This would equate with fully
realizing and awakening
to our spirit's
multidimensional existence.
When we consciously achieve
this oneness with our spirit,
then the 22 distinct movies
merge into one movie,
and we live all 22
archetypes of life
in a single physical reality.
Another way of saying
this is that we
bring our 22 parallel
realities back into coherence
and reunite them.
How do we do that?
Well, by becoming aware
of them, by awakening
to our multidimensional being.
One tool we have for
this that gives us
a window into each of
these 22 archetypal lives
is the 22 major
arcana of the tarot.
When we study the 22
archetypes of the major arcana,
not as a method of divination
but as a window into the self,
we can become more
aware of those 22 lives
our spirit is experiencing.
We can ask, who would I
be in this archetypal life
or that one?
What would I be doing?
How my experiences and
perceptions be different
in each life?
We are connected to all of
them already through the higher
consciousness of our spirit.
So first, we become
aware of them.
Then we start to merge
them into this life
by putting on those
hats, so to speak,
and trying them
out in this life.
Be the fool.
Be the magician.
Be the high priestess.
Be the lovers.
Be strength.
Be temperance.
Be the world, and so on.
As we awaken all 22
archetypes in this life,
then the 22 movies
become one movie,
one unified and full life.
Once we've merged
all 22, then what?
Is that it?
No, we are eternal beings
on an evolutionary journey.
After successfully completing
each step on our journey,
then we spiral up to the next
higher octave of our evolution.
Once we unify and
assimilate all 22 archetypes
of the physical life,
our reality then
splits or decoheres
again, but this time it
becomes 72 parallel aspects
of our soul's evolution.
So we move beyond the physical
into the levels of soul
and continue
evolving by learning
to integrate a new set
of expanded archetypes.
As we successfully merge those
72 archetypes of the soul
into one whole, then
we spiral up again,
and our parallel
realities now split
into 144 archetypes of spirit.
Then we begin the evolution
of merging these into one
and so on out into
our eternal being
in the infinite multiverse.
By becoming aware of
our multidimensionality
and the parallel realities
of our human potential,
we begin to touch infinity and
find our way back to reuniting
with our eternal being.
Our purpose through all of
this is to first become aware
and then to restore
coherence by our use of will
or consciousness and
taking the right actions.
With each cycle of our
evolutionary journey,
we learn to play more
musical compositions
in the grand
symphony of creation.
We learn to use new
instruments and techniques.
We evolve, transform, and grow.
And hopefully by
the time our spirit
returns to the multiverse,
we have added some new notes
to the symphony
of possibilities.
Join me again as we
explore other forms of life
in our universe and beyond.
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard.
Thank you for
exploring the mysteries
of the universe with me in this
episode of "Mystery Teachings".